# 12.3 State Transition Diagrams

## Finite State Machine (FSM)
=> A model where a program can be in any of a finite number of pre-defined states.
=> A variety of inputs can be entered and will cause a state transition.

### Syntax:
* A state is denoted by a circle containing a description:
deactivated or S1
* State at which program starts:
start indicator
* A state transition will be caused if a program is in a given state and a specific input is given.
    * The transition is indicated by an arrow and the condition is defined above: where a = e.g. button 1 pushed
* Final states are marked by a double circle. (Optional)
    * Often there are no transitions from a halting state to another, but this isn't a requirement.
    * halting states are states that are accepted to be the last state of the program.
* Only S1 is accepted to be the last state of the program here.

Figure 1

## Finite State Machines with Output
aka "Mealy Machine"
* The output is noted on the right side of the input condition, separated by a vertical line.
=> When transitioning between states the program can give an output.

## State Transition Tables

### For Finite State Machine:
e.g. when the current state = S1 and input = b next state = S2

| | **current state** | |
| :--- | :---: | :---: |
| | **S1** | **S2** |
| **Input { a** | S1 | S1 |
| **Input { b** | S2 | S2 |
<br>
for "Figure 1", see above

### For Mealy Machine:
=> $$ \text{number of columns} = \text{number of states} \times \text{variables} $$

| | | | | |
| :--- | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| **Current State** | S1 | S1 | S2 | S2 |
| **Input Bit** | 0 | 1 | 0 | 1 |
| **Next State** | S1 | S2 | S2 | S2 |
| **Output Bit** | 0 | 1 | 1 | 0 |

